docs: added content for operations in AsyncAPI Document (#2171)
asyncapi/website: pages/docs/concepts/asyncapi-document/adding-operations.md

---
title: Adding Operations
weight: 60
---

> In a messaging system, the term "operations" refers to the various methods by which messages are exchanged between participants or components. 

Reviewer: In the introduction part of the document, it would be nice to include what operations also mean in AsyncAPI document, how they relate, how they work or used briefly. Doing so, the reader will have better understanding and more context

Author: added some more lined within the introduction

> ## Operations Features

Reviewer: The document is about operations alone so it would give out the same meaning. Again, Keep the headings as concise yet informative as possible.
```suggestion
## Features
```

> - Operations describe the behaviors and capabilities of the messaging channels described in the document.

Reviewer: Be specific to avoid confusion. Document can be ambiguous or confusing for a newbie to comprehend or catch on to. 
```suggestion
- Operations describe the behaviors and capabilities of the messaging channels described in the AsyncAPI document.
```

- In a messaging channel, an operation represents a particular action or interaction that can be performed. 

- The purpose of these operations is to provide a standardized means for describing the process of publishing, subscribing to, requesting, or replying to messages within the messaging system.

> ## Steps to Add Operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Adding Operations
```

> For adding operations to an AsyncAPI document, we need to define them within the channels section of the document. The step-by-step guide on how to add operations to an AsyncAPI document is as follows - 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For adding operations to an AsyncAPI document, we need to define them within the channels section of the document. You can add operations to an AsyncAPI document as follows - 
```

- Open your AsyncAPI document in a text editor or an AsyncAPI editor tool.

> - Locate the `channels` section in your AsyncAPI document. This section defines the messaging channels and their associated operations.

Reviewer: Again, 'this' is an antecedent remember?

```suggestion
- Locate the `channels` section in your AsyncAPI document. The `channels` section defines the messaging channels and their associated operations.
```

- Within the `channels` section, add a new channel using the desired channel name. Channels are represented as properties within the `channels` object, and their names are usually formatted as paths or topics, depending on the messaging protocol you are using (e.g. `/users/{userId}/notifications` or `user.notifications`).

> - Inside the channel definition, specify the desired operations by creating sub-properties for each operation. Common operations include `publish`, `subscribe`, `publishSubscribe`, `requestReply`, and request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Inside the channel definition, specify the desired operations by creating sub-properties for each operation. Common operations include `publish`, `subscribe`, `publishSubscribe`, `requestReply`, and `request`.
```

> - For each operation, define its details using the appropriate keywords and properties. These details include the operation type, payload schema, headers, bindings, and other relevant information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For each operation, define its details using the appropriate keywords and properties. These details typically include the operation type, payload schema, headers, bindings, and other relevant information.
```

> ```mermaid

Reviewer: Would be nice to have a sentence introducing the diagram and what it illustrates?

Author: added a heading to the mermaid diagram describing what it is actually showing

flowchart TD
style A fill:#E5EE8C,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
style B fill:#F3A06A,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
style C fill:#CBF399,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
style D fill:#F5B5EF,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
style E fill:#F568A8,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    A(Open AsyncAPI document) --> B(Locate the `channels` section)
    B --> C(Add a new channel)
    C --> D(Specify operations)
    D --> E(Define operation details)
 classDef labelStyle color:#000000;
    class A,B,C,D,E,F,G,H,I,J labelStyle;
```

> ## Operations Types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Types
```

> The operations of the AsyncAPI document are divided into the following different categories based on the purpose they serve -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The operations of the AsyncAPI document are divided into the following categories based on the purpose they serve -
```

```mermaid
flowchart TD
style A fill:#E5EE8C,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
style B fill:#CBF399,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
style C fill:#F5B5EF,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
style D fill:#F568A8,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    A[Components] -- Send messages --> B(Publish Operation)
    B -- Messages/Events --> C[Specific Channels]
    C --> D[Consumption by Other Components]
 classDef labelStyle color:#000000;
    class A,B,C,D,E,F,G,H,I,J labelStyle;
```  

- <b> Subscribing: </b> By using the subscribe operation, components are able to receive messages from a particular channel. The subscriber can use this operation to indicate whether they are interested in receiving messages from a particular channel.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
style A fill:#E5EE8C,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
style B fill:#CBF399,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
style C fill:#F5B5EF,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
style D fill:#F568A8,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    A[Particular Channels] -- Messages --> B(Subscribe Operation)
    B --> D[Indicate Interest in Receiving]
    D -- Receive messages--> C[Components]
classDef labelStyle color:#000000;
    class A,B,C,D,E,F,G,H,I,J labelStyle;
```  

> - <b> Request-Reply: </b> RequestReply establishes a pattern of request-response communication between components. The client can send a request message, and the server will respond with a corresponding reply message. Typically, this operation is used for synchronous communication in which the client anticipates a response from the server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- <b> Request-Reply: </b> Request/Reply establishes a pattern of request-response communication between components. The client can send a request message, and the server will respond with a corresponding reply message. Typically, this operation is used for synchronous communication in which the client anticipates a response from the server.
```

---
title: Adding Operations
weight: 60
---

In a messaging system, the term "operations" refers to the various methods by which messages are exchanged between participants or components. 

## Features

- Operations describe the behaviors and capabilities of the messaging channels described in the AsyncAPI document.

- In a messaging channel, an operation represents a particular action or interaction that can be performed. 

> - The purpose of these operations is to provide a standardized means for describing the process of publishing, subscribing to, requesting, or replying to messages within the messaging system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The purpose of these operations is to provide a standardized means for describing the process of sending, receiving from, requesting, or replying to messages within the messaging system.
```

## Adding Operations

> `operations` are no longer under `channels` in AsyncAPI Spec 3.0.0, instead, `operations` are separate objects in the AsyncAPI document on the same level. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`operations` are separate objects in the AsyncAPI document on the same level. 
```

please write in the way what is possible now, and not how it worked before

> `channels` can be linked within `operations` by referencing them within the `channels`, just like the following example -

Reviewer 2: where is this `-` suppose to point? did you forget to add example or?

Author: corrected the sequence of the example below the statement

> For adding operations to an AsyncAPI document, we need to define them within the channels section of the document. You can add operations to an AsyncAPI document as follows - 

Reviewer 2: > For adding operations to an AsyncAPI document, we need to define them within the channels section of the document

no, operations are not part of channels

Author: removed that line as it was unneccesary, it possibly was a residue from the old draft

```

> onUserSignUp:

Reviewer 2: missing `action`

Author: added `action` in the example

| description | string | A detailed explanation of the operation |
| Channel | Reference Object Link | A `ref` pointer to the definition of the channel in which the operation is performed |
| Action | "send" or "receive" | Uses `send` when the application sends a message to the given channel, and uses `receive` when the application receives a message from the given channel |
| Tags | Tag Object | List of tags for logical grouping and categorization of operations |
| Bindings | Bindings Object | A map where keys store the name of protocol and the values store protocol-specific definitions for the operation |
| Traits | Traits Object | A list of traits to apply to the operation object. Traits must be merged using Traits Merge Mechanism. The resulting object should be a valid Operation Object |

```
onUserSignUp:
  title: User sign up
  summary: Action to sign a user up.
  description: A longer description
  channel:
    $ref: '#/channels/userSignup'
  action: send
  tags:
    - name: user
    - name: signup
    - name: register
  bindings:
    amqp:
      ack: false
  traits:
    - $ref: '#/components/operationTraits/kafka'

> ```

Reviewer 2: please do not duplicate what is already in the spec document, better just link to reference docs

maybe you wanna follow the approach other writers did, diagram representation of where operation is and what are the required fields (at the beginning of the document)

Author: referenced the parts of the actual spec 3 document - https://v3.asyncapi.com/docs/reference/specification/v3.0.0-next-major-spec.12#operationsObject and added a mermaid diagram to brief the field names is added in the beginning of the document.

> ## Types

Reviewer 2: what is the purpose of this section and where did you get this content from? in v3 there is no longer publishing and subscribing - and if it comes to request/reply, there will be separate concept document that you should just link to

maybe instead of Types you mean actions? `send` and `receive` where `send` means that application describe in AsyncAPI document "sends" a message and `receive` means it is "receiving" a message

Author: since this section is no more relevant to v3 I have removed that section. `send` and `receive` is already defined in the table of spec3 doc - https://v3.asyncapi.com/docs/reference/specification/v3.0.0-next-major-spec.12#operationsObject
which I already linked in the beginning of the document

---
title: Adding Operations
weight: 60
---

In a messaging system, the term "operations" refers to the various methods by which messages are exchanged between participants or components. Operations are useful for understanding how the messaging system in AsyncAPI works, and how different components within the system communicate with each other asynchronously. They help developers and users to understand the tasks that API can perform.

> ## Features
> 
> - Operations describe the behaviors and capabilities of the messaging channels described in the AsyncAPI document.
> 
> - In a messaging channel, an operation represents a particular action or interaction that can be performed. 
> 
> - The purpose of these operations is to provide a standardized means for describing the process of sending, receiving from, requesting, or replying to messages within the messaging system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a AsyncAPI document, Operations describe the behaviors and capabilities of the messaging channels described in the AsyncAPI document. In a messaging channel, an `operation` represents a particular action or interaction that can be performed. The purpose of operations is to provide a standardized means for describing the process of sending, receiving from, requesting, or replying to messages within the messaging system. 
```

## Defining Operations

Operations can be defined as an independent object in the AsyncAPI document. Operations have the following components for their definition. More information about each field name that is used to define operations can be found [here](https://v3.asyncapi.com/docs/reference/specification/v3.0.0-next-major-spec.12#operationObject). 
Additionally, an example to show the usage of each field name in defining operations can be found [here](https://v3.asyncapi.com/docs/reference/specification/v3.0.0-next-major-spec.12#operationsObject).

> The following diagram briefs the important field names that are frequently used to define AsyncAPI operations in Spec 3.0.0 -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following diagram briefs the some field names that are frequently used to define operations in a AsyncAPI document:
```

---
title: Adding Operations
weight: 60
---

In a messaging system, the term "operations" refers to the various methods by which messages are exchanged between participants or components. 

## Features

- Operations describe the behaviors and capabilities of the messaging channels described in the AsyncAPI document.

- In a messaging channel, an operation represents a particular action or interaction that can be performed. 

- The purpose of these operations is to provide a standardized means for describing the process of sending, receiving from, requesting, or replying to messages within the messaging system.

## Defining Operations

> Operations can be defined as an independent object in the AsyncAPI document. Operations have the following components for it's definition. More information about each field names that are used to define operations can be found [here](https://v3.asyncapi.com/docs/reference/specification/v3.0.0-next-major-spec.12#operationObject). 

Reviewer 2: > Operations have the following components for it's definition

sorry if I judge too quickly and draw false conclusions, but looking at this round of review, you did not really read what you wrote before submitting for another review round. Please make sure that what you write is accurate and ready for review (relating also to other comments where I noticed you just copy over stuff without making sure what you do)

Author: Sorry for the previous miscommunication. I have been trying to use GitHub Desktop lately after suggestions from other contributors, and I am not very good at using it, which is why I am seeing that some of my commits are not pushed into the repository properly especially the deletion of lines. I deleted all those lines that you pointed out in my VS Code editor, but for some reason, the changes are not showing up here.

I am extremely sorry for the inconvenience, and I will be more careful in the future.
I have made the required changes and also updated the contents with some details about the field names in adding operations. I have ensured all changes are pushed correctly this time.

Additionally, an example to show the usage of each field names in defining operations can be found [here](https://v3.asyncapi.com/docs/reference/specification/v3.0.0-next-major-spec.12#operationsObject).
`operations` are separate objects in the AsyncAPI document on the same level. 

> `channels` can be linked within `operations` by referencing them within the `channels`, just like the following example -

Reviewer 2: you have the same in next section

Author: sorry, this line was supposed to be removed in the current draft, but for some glitch, it was not removed when I pushed the changes to github this time

Author: I have removed the line and pushed the changes again

For adding operations to an AsyncAPI document, we need to define them within the channels section of the document. You can add operations to an AsyncAPI document as follows - 

The following diagram briefs the important field names that are frequently used to define AsyncAPI operations in Spec 3.0.0 -

```mermaid

> flowchart TD

Reviewer 2: please align the style of the diagram with rest of writers, like Rohit or Mahfuza

Author: sure, I have dropped both Rohit & Mahfuza a text, for a sample of their writing style so that I can align my work with their.

Author: updated mermaid diagram code as per Rohit's diagram code

style A fill:#E5EE8C,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
style B fill:#CBF399,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
style C fill:#F5B5EF,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
style D fill:#F568A8,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px

style E fill:#B40486,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
style F fill:#86B404,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
style G fill:#01A9DB,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
style H fill:#F781F3,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px

>   A[Fields required to define AsyncAPI Operations] -->|1| B[Summary]

Reviewer 2: not true, only `action` and `channel` are required

Author: > not true, only `action` and `channel` are required

![image](https://github.com/asyncapi/website/assets/78029145/906c22cb-c58c-4012-ba30-4ee3486f0f62)

Should I divide the diagram for both required and optional fields for operations?

Author: divided the diagram and aligned it with other tech writers' mermaid diagrams

![image](https://github.com/asyncapi/website/assets/78029145/68a25c95-db13-47e7-aca0-e517c4070b30)

Author: I can see Rohit has used only 2 colors for the diagram nodes, waiting for Mahfuza to let me know if the color is used is bipartite or we can use more colors for the same

Author: got the diagram reviewed by @alequetzalli, and implemented her suggestions as per the style guide

  A -->|2| C[Description]
  A -->|3| D[Channel]
  A -->|4| E[Action]
  A -->|5| F[Tags]
  A -->|6| G[Bindings]
  A -->|7| H[Traits]

classDef labelStyle color:#000000;
    class A,B,C,D,E,F,G,H labelStyle;
```

## Adding Operations

> `operations` are no longer under `channels` in AsyncAPI Spec 3.0.0, instead, `operations` are separate objects in the AsyncAPI document on the same level. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`operations` are separate objects in the AsyncAPI document on the root level together with `channels` and other objects. 
```

let's not mention what was it like prior 3.0

Reviewer 2: do we even need this sentence? you already wrote `Operations can be defined as an independent object in the AsyncAPI document` in previous section

> `channels` can be linked within `operations` by referencing them within the `channels`, just like the following example - 

Reviewer 2: it's not that it can, it must be, `channel` reference is required in operation

```suggestion
Operation must specify on what channel it is performed. You do it by referencing the `channel` with `$ref`, just like in the following example:
```
